********************
Language Conventions
********************

While you can always check the CMakePP Core documentation for how to use a
function, CMakePP strives to also make it as easy as possible to "guess" how to
use functions. Key to this effort is understanding the various conventions
underlying how CMakePP decides on APIs. This chapter goes into more details
regarding the CMakePP language conventions.

.. note::

   CMakePP strives to have no exceptions to these conventions. If an exception
   exists (and it is not documented why it is an exception) assume it is a bug
   and please file an issue on GitHub.

Namespaces
==========

CMake has a concept of variable scope, but does not have a namespace concept.
The most straightforward way to introduce namespaces is to mangle a prefix onto
function and variable names. CMakePP uses the prefix ``cpp_`` for all commands
that are part of the public API. This helps avoid conflicts with existing CMake
commands, commands from other modules, as well as commands users may write.
Similarly CMakePP uses the prefix ``_cpp_`` for "protected" commands and
``__cpp_`` for private commands. Note that commands in native CMake (as well
as CMakePP) are case-insensitive meaning ``CPP_`` (on a command) is still the
same namespace as ``cpp_``.

In CMake variables are case-sensitive. Native CMake tends to prefix their
configuration variables with ``CMAKE_``. CMakePP follows suit with prefixes
``CMAKEPP_CORE_`` and ``__CMAKEPP_CORE`` respectively for public and private
configuration variables (``_CMAKEPP_CORE`` will be used if there is ever need
for a protected variable).

Function Argument Order
=======================

The signatures of functions found in the CMakePP library all follow the same
conventions when it comes to argument orders. For a non-member CMakePP function
taking :math:`m` arguments and returning :math:`n` values (:math:`n\le m`), the
first :math:`n` arguments will be the :math:`n` values returned by the function
and the remaining :math:`m-n` values will be the inputs. CMake nor CMakePP make
any attempt to distinguish the value of :math:`n` in the signature and the only
way to know if a value is input or output is to consult the documentation (or
read the source code).

.. note::

   Native CMake uses a mix of return positions. For example, the ``list()`` and
   ``string()`` commands tend to have the variable holding the result as the
   last argument. Note that for the various string hashing operations (*e.g.*
   ``string(MD5 ...)`` the variable for the return actually comes before the
   string to hash. Other functions, such as ``get_filename_component`` also put
   the return variable before the input arguments.

For all intents and purposes we can think of CMake's native ``list()`` and
``string()`` commands as defining APIs for calling member functions of ``list``
and ``string`` instances respectively. Within this view, a call like
``list(LENGTH <list_instance> <return_variable>)`` is calling the member
function named ``LENGTH`` of the provided ``list`` instance and returning the
result in the provided variable. CMakePP generalizes this convention to
additional types, including user-defined classes.

For member functions associated with a type ``T``, CMakePP convention is to
access the members via a function named ``T`` whose first argument is the name
of the member function and whose second argument is the instance the member is
being called on (*e.g.*, the ``this`` instance in C++ or the ``self`` instance
in Python). Arguments following the object instance obey the same ordering
conventions as non-member functions (returns followed by input).
